All humans, as well as those semi‑humans and non‑humans in close contact with people, speak the common tongue. This language is spoken by all states in the central campaign area, but your referee may have regions in which the common tongue differs from that which your character speaks.
In addition to the common tongue, all intelligent creatures able to converse in speech use special languages particular to their alignment. These alignment languages are: Chaotic Evil, Chaotic Good, Chaotic Neutral, Lawful Evil, Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral, Neutral Evil, Neutral Good, and True Neutral. The alignment of your character dictates which language he or she speaks, for only one alignment dialect can be used by a character (cf. Character Classes, The Assassin). If a character changes alignment, the previously known language can no longer be spoken.
In addition to the above, druids have their own special tongue, and thieves have their secret speech, the Thieves’ Cant.
Therefore, a character will speak at least two languages: common and alignment. He or she might also be able to converse in the special patois of druids or thieves. Semi‑human and non‑human characters are able to speak racial tongues as well (see Character Races). In most campaigns, openly speaking an alignment language is likely to be frowned upon as a serious breach of social etiquette
A character can learn additional languages. Even those of rather slow wit (8 Intelligence) can learn one additional language, although their vocabulary, usage, and ability to translate must necessarily be limited. The very bright can learn five, six, or even seven (for details of the number of tongues which can be learned, see Character Abilities, Intelligence). Here is how a new language is learned:
The character must find a person (human, semi‑human, or non‑human) or a talking creature who speaks the language to be learned. The character must then be in close proximity to his or her instructor for up to one year, and this period can be shortened by one month for each point of Intelligence above 12. Thus, a character with 13 Intelligence learns the new language in 11 months; 14 Intelligence learns it in 10 months; and so on, down to 18 Intelligence, which requires only six months. Only one new language can be studied at any given time.
Which languages are knowable in a campaign is strictly up to the DM who runs it. The following list gives some of the languages typically used:
Dwarvish, Elvish, Goblin
Halfling, Lizardman, Hobgoblin
Ogrish, Kobold, Orcish