The Character With Two Classes

Unlike multi-classed characters who are of non- or semi-human race, the character with two classes must be human. 
To attain the second class, the character must switch his or her profession at some point. Thereafter no progression 
in the original class is possible.

In order to switch from one class to another, the character must have an ability score of 15 or more in the principal 
attribute(s) ability of the original class and a 17 or 18 in the principal attribute(s) of the class changed to. 
Note that nearly any combination of classes is thus possible, i.e. cleric 8 fighter, cleric & paladin, cleric & ranger, 
etc. Alignment will preclude some combinations.

When the character opts to cease his or her old profession and become a new class, the character retains the number of 
hit dice (and the commensurate hit points) due to a character of the level of his or her class. However, all other 
functions of the character are at 1st level of experience, for that is his or her ability in the newly espoused class.
Furthermore, if, during the of any adventure, the character resorts to the use of any of the cap s of functions of his 
or her former class, the character gains no experience for the adventure. Having switched classes, the character must 
perform strictly within the parameters of his or her new profession. Reversion to the former class negates all 
experience potential for the new class with respect to the course of recent activities, i.e. the adventure during 
which original profession functions were resorted to.

At such time as the character has attained a level of experience in his or her new class which exceeds the character's 
former class level, the following benefits are gained:

1. A hit die appropriate to the new class is gained for each increase in level of experience, up to the maximum normal
 for the class in question (and thereafter hit points are likewise gained), and

2. The character may mix functions freely and still gain experience, although restrictions regarding armor, shield, 
and/or weapon apply with regard to operations particular to one or both classes.

Example: A character with ability scores of 15 strength, 17 intelligence, 12 wisdom, 10 dexterity, 16 constitution, and 7 charisma 
is begun as a fighter. After attaining 6th level, the player switches the character to magic-user. This allows the character to 
retain six ten-sided hit dice, but in all other respects he or she must be a 1st level magic-user, wearing no armor, carrying 
those weapons usable by his or her new class, and using spells to combat opponents. When 7th level of experience is gained, however, the
haracter gets a four-sided hit die for additional hit points he or she can sustain at the new level. Furthermore, the character 
can now carry (but not wear) armor and weapons not normally usable by magic-users, and resort to their use if the need arises 
and not be penalized in respect to experience as a magic-user, for he or she has already surpassed in the new class the 
disciplines of the former. Thus, no harm accrues to his or her experience as a magic-user. Note that this does not allow 
spell use while armor clad, such as an elven fighter/magic user is able to-do.

